statistics: add docs for the FLUSH STATS_DELTA statement (#23258)
pingcap/docs: sql-statements/sql-statement-flush-stats-delta.md

---
title: FLUSH STATS_DELTA
summary: An overview of the usage of FLUSH STATS_DELTA for the TiDB database.
---

# FLUSH STATS_DELTA

> `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` persists the pending statistics delta buffered in TiDB memory to the [`mysql.stats_meta`](/mysql-schema/mysql-schema.md#statistics-system-tables) system table immediately. TiDB supports this statement starting from v8.5.7 and v9.0.0.

Reviewer: Maybe the statement `v9.0.0` needs a check from doc steam.

Reviewer 2: Currently, "v9.0.0" is only added for tracking purposes, indicating that the code change has also been made in the master branch. After cherry-picking this PR to release-8.5, I'll remove it from the cherry-pick PR.

> `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` persists the pending statistics delta buffered in TiDB memory to the [`mysql.stats_meta`](/mysql-schema/mysql-schema.md#statistics-system-tables) system table immediately. TiDB supports this statement starting from v8.5.7 and v9.0.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# FLUSH STATS_DELTA <span class="version-mark">New in v8.5.7 and v9.0.0</span>

`FLUSH STATS_DELTA` persists the pending statistics delta buffered in TiDB memory to the [`mysql.stats_meta`](/mysql-schema/mysql-schema.md#statistics-system-tables) system table immediately.
```

> When you change data using DML statements (such as `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`), TiDB records the changes to the total number of rows and the number of modified rows for each table, buffers these changes (called the statistics delta) in the memory of the TiDB instance that executes the statements, and persists them to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table every 20 * [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (60 seconds by default). For more information, see [Automatic update](/statistics.md#automatic-update).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you change data using DML statements (such as `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`), TiDB records changes to the total row count and modified row count of each affected table, buffers these changes (called the statistics delta) in the memory of the TiDB node that executes the statements, and persists them to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table every 20 * [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (60 seconds by default). For more information, see [Automatic update](/statistics.md#automatic-update).
```

Reviewer 2: Use "TiDB node" instead of "TiDB instance" as possible because now we are using the word "intance" for TiDB Cloud Starter/Essential/Premium too

> Because the [health state of tables](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-healthy.md), the output of [`SHOW STATS_META`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-meta.md), and the scheduling of automatic statistics collection depend on the persisted statistics metadata, `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` is useful when you need the persisted statistics metadata to reflect recent data changes immediately, such as in testing scenarios that verify optimizer behavior. You do not need to execute this statement before [`ANALYZE TABLE`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-analyze-table.md), because TiDB automatically flushes the pending statistics delta of a table before collecting statistics on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the [statistics health state of tables](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-healthy.md), the output of [`SHOW STATS_META`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-meta.md), and the scheduling of automatic statistics collection depend on the persisted statistics metadata, `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` is useful when you need the persisted statistics metadata to reflect recent data changes immediately, such as in testing scenarios that verify optimizer behavior. You do not need to execute `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` before executing [`ANALYZE TABLE`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-analyze-table.md), because TiDB automatically flushes the pending statistics delta of a table before collecting statistics on it.
```

> Because the [health state of tables](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-healthy.md), the output of [`SHOW STATS_META`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-meta.md), and the scheduling of automatic statistics collection depend on the persisted values, `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` is useful when you need the persisted statistics metadata to reflect recent data changes immediately, such as in testing scenarios that verify optimizer behavior. You do not need to execute this statement before [`ANALYZE TABLE`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-analyze-table.md), because TiDB automatically flushes the pending statistics delta of a table before collecting statistics on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the [health state of tables](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-healthy.md), the output of [`SHOW STATS_META`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-stats-meta.md), and the scheduling of automatic statistics collection depend on the persisted statistics metadata, `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` is useful when you need the persisted statistics metadata to reflect recent data changes immediately, such as in testing scenarios that verify optimizer behavior. You do not need to execute this statement before [`ANALYZE TABLE`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-analyze-table.md), because TiDB automatically flushes the pending statistics delta of a table before collecting statistics on it.
```

## Synopsis

```ebnf+diagram
FlushStatsDeltaStmt ::=
    'FLUSH' 'STATS_DELTA' FlushTargetList ClusterOption?

FlushTargetList ::=
    FlushTarget (',' FlushTarget)*

FlushTarget ::=
    TableName
  | SchemaWildcard
  | GlobalWildcard

TableName ::=
    Identifier ('.' Identifier)?

SchemaWildcard ::=
    Identifier '.' '*'

GlobalWildcard ::=
    '*' '.' '*'

ClusterOption ::=
    'CLUSTER'
```

## Options

> - **Targets (`FlushTargetList`)**: specifies which tables to flush. You must specify at least one target.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Targets (`FlushTargetList`)**: specifies the tables whose statistics delta you want to flush. You must specify at least one target.
```

    - `table_name`: flushes the statistics delta of a table in the current database. If you do not select a database, TiDB returns the `No database selected` error.
    - `db_name.table_name`: flushes the statistics delta of a table in the specified database.

>     - `db_name.*`: flushes the statistics delta of all tables in the specified database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `table_name`: flushes the statistics delta of a specific table in the current database. If you do not select a database, TiDB returns the `No database selected` error.
    - `db_name.table_name`: flushes the statistics delta of a specific table in the specific database.
    - `db_name.*`: flushes the statistics delta of all tables in the specific database.
```

    - `*.*`: flushes the statistics delta of every table.

> - **`CLUSTER`**: broadcasts the statement to every TiDB instance in the cluster. Each TiDB instance buffers the statistics delta of the DML statements that it executes. Without this option, TiDB persists only the delta buffered on the instance you are connected to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `db_name.*`: flushes the statistics delta of all tables in the specified database.
    - `*.*`: flushes the statistics delta of all tables.
- **`CLUSTER`**: broadcasts the statement to all TiDB nodes in the cluster. Each TiDB node buffers the statistics delta of the DML statements that it executes. Without this option, TiDB only persists the delta buffered on the TiDB node you are connected to.
```

> - **`CLUSTER`**: broadcasts the statement to every TiDB instance in the cluster. Each TiDB instance buffers the statistics delta of the DML statements that it executes, so without this option, only the delta buffered on the TiDB instance that you are connected to is persisted.

Author: Applied the second-person and active-voice changes. Kept the descriptions lowercase after the colon to stay consistent with sibling pages such as `sql-statement-refresh-stats.md`, which use this convention for the same list structure.

> - **`CLUSTER`**: broadcasts the statement to all TiDB nodes in the cluster. Each TiDB node buffers the statistics delta of the DML statements that it executes. Without this option, TiDB only persists the delta buffered on the TiDB node you are connected to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`CLUSTER`**: executes the statement on all TiDB nodes in the cluster. Each TiDB node buffers the statistics delta of the DML statements that it executes. Without this option, TiDB only persists the delta buffered on the TiDB node you are connected to.
```

Note the following behavior:

> - TiDB deduplicates overlapping targets: `*.*` covers all other targets, and `db_name.*` covers tables in that database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- TiDB deduplicates overlapping targets. For example, in `FLUSH STATS_DELTA *.*, test.t`, the `test.t` target is ignored because `*.*` already includes all tables. Similarly, in `FLUSH STATS_DELTA test.*, test.t`, the `test.t` target is ignored because `test.*` already includes all tables in the `test` database.
```

- For a partitioned table, TiDB persists the statistics delta of the table and all its partitions.
- If a specified database or table does not exist, TiDB returns a warning and skips that target.

## Examples

Persist the statistics delta of a single table immediately after data changes:

```sql
USE test;
CREATE TABLE t (a INT, b INT);
INSERT INTO t VALUES (1, 1), (2, 2), (3, 3);
FLUSH STATS_DELTA t;
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)
```

> TiDB has now persisted the row count changes of the table to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table. You can view them using `SHOW STATS_META`. Note that `SHOW STATS_META` reads statistics from the memory of the TiDB instance you are connected to. Because this instance loads the persisted values within [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (`3s` by default), the flushed values might appear in the output after a short delay:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TiDB has now persisted the row count changes of the table to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table. You can view persisted values using `SHOW STATS_META`. Note that `SHOW STATS_META` reads statistics from the memory of the TiDB node you are connected to. Because this TiDB node loads the persisted values within [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (`3s` by default), the flushed values might appear in the output after a short delay:
```

```sql
SHOW STATS_META WHERE table_name = 't';
```

```
+---------+------------+----------------+---------------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+
| Db_name | Table_name | Partition_name | Update_time         | Modify_count | Row_count | Last_analyze_time |
+---------+------------+----------------+---------------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+
| test    | t          |                | 2026-07-13 15:30:00 |            3 |         3 | NULL              |
+---------+------------+----------------+---------------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

Persist the statistics delta of a table in the current database and every table in the `sales` database:

```sql
FLUSH STATS_DELTA t, sales.*;
```

> Persist the statistics delta of all tables buffered on every TiDB instance in the cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Persist the statistics delta of all tables buffered on every TiDB node in the cluster:
```

```sql
FLUSH STATS_DELTA *.* CLUSTER;
```

## Privileges

> To execute `FLUSH STATS_DELTA`, you must have the `SELECT` privilege on the target objects: the target table for `table_name` or `db_name.table_name` targets, the target database for `db_name.*` targets, and the global `SELECT` privilege for `*.*` targets. Unlike other `FLUSH` statements, `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` does not require the `RELOAD` privilege.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To execute `FLUSH STATS_DELTA`, you must have the `SELECT` privilege on the target objects: 

- For `table_name` or `db_name.table_name`, you need the `SELECT` privilege on the target table.
- For `db_name.*`, you need the `SELECT` privilege on the target database.
- For `*.*`, you need the global `SELECT` privilege.

Unlike other `FLUSH` statements, `FLUSH STATS_DELTA` does not require the `RELOAD` privilege.
```

---
title: FLUSH STATS_DELTA
summary: An overview of the usage of FLUSH STATS_DELTA for the TiDB database.
---

# FLUSH STATS_DELTA <span class="version-mark">New in v8.5.7 and v9.0.0</span>

`FLUSH STATS_DELTA` persists the pending statistics delta buffered in TiDB memory to the [`mysql.stats_meta`](/mysql-schema/mysql-schema.md#statistics-system-tables) system table immediately.

> When you change data using DML statements (such as `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`), TiDB records changes to the total row count and modified row count of each affected table, buffers these changes (called the statistics delta) in the memory of the TiDB node that executes the statements, and persists them to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table every 20 * [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (60 seconds by default). For more information, see [Automatic update](/statistics.md#automatic-update).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you change data using DML statements (such as `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`), TiDB records changes to the total row count and modified row count of each affected table, and buffers these changes (called the statistics delta) in the memory of the TiDB node that executes the statements. By default, TiDB persists statistics delta to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table every 20 * [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (60 seconds by default). For more information, see [Automatic update](/statistics.md#automatic-update).
```

FlushTargetList ::=
    FlushTarget (',' FlushTarget)*

FlushTarget ::=
    TableName
  | SchemaWildcard
  | GlobalWildcard

TableName ::=
    Identifier ('.' Identifier)?

SchemaWildcard ::=
    Identifier '.' '*'

GlobalWildcard ::=
    '*' '.' '*'

ClusterOption ::=
    'CLUSTER'
```

## Options

- **Targets (`FlushTargetList`)**: specifies the tables whose statistics delta you want to flush. You must specify at least one target.
    - `table_name`: flushes the statistics delta of a specific table in the current database. If you do not select a database, TiDB returns the `No database selected` error.
    - `db_name.table_name`: flushes the statistics delta of a specific table in the specific database.
    - `db_name.*`: flushes the statistics delta of all tables in the specific database.
    - `*.*`: flushes the statistics delta of all tables.
- **`CLUSTER`**: executes the statement on all TiDB nodes in the cluster. Each TiDB node buffers the statistics delta of the DML statements that it executes. Without this option, TiDB only persists the delta buffered on the TiDB node you are connected to.

Note the following behavior:

> - TiDB deduplicates overlapping targets. For example, in `FLUSH STATS_DELTA *.*, test.t`, the `test.t` target is ignored because `*.*` already includes all tables. Similarly, in `FLUSH STATS_DELTA test.*, test.t`, the `test.t` target is ignored because `test.*` already includes all tables in the `test` database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- TiDB deduplicates overlapping targets to be flushed. For example, in `FLUSH STATS_DELTA *.*, test.t`, the `test.t` target is ignored because `*.*` already includes all tables. Similarly, in `FLUSH STATS_DELTA test.*, test.t`, the `test.t` target is ignored because `test.*` already includes all tables in the `test` database.
```

- For a partitioned table, TiDB persists the statistics delta of the table and all its partitions.
- If a specified database or table does not exist, TiDB returns a warning and skips that target.

## Examples

Persist the statistics delta of a single table immediately after data changes:

```sql
USE test;
CREATE TABLE t (a INT, b INT);
INSERT INTO t VALUES (1, 1), (2, 2), (3, 3);
FLUSH STATS_DELTA t;
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)
```

> TiDB has now persisted the row count changes of the table to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table. You can view persisted values using `SHOW STATS_META`. Note that `SHOW STATS_META` reads statistics from the memory of the TiDB node you are connected to. Because this TiDB node loads the persisted values within [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (`3s` by default), the flushed values might appear in the output after a short delay:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TiDB has now persisted the row count changes of the table to the `mysql.stats_meta` system table. You can view persisted values using `SHOW STATS_META`. Note that `SHOW STATS_META` reads statistics from the memory of the TiDB node you are connected to. Because this TiDB node loads the persisted values every [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease) (`3s` by default), the flushed values might appear in the output after a short delay:
```
